---
title: "Oversocialization as an Attack Vector"
categories:
  - Essay
  - Analysis
tags:
  - essay
  - social media
---

<p> For my first post, I'd like to share a short essay I wrote on the social psychology of social media; I provide an overview on the polarizing nature of such platforms, referencing a 2020 documentary <i>The Social Dilemma</i>.</p>

<br />

> <a href="https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/oversocialized"><i>Oversocialized (adj.)</i></a>
> 1. Assimilated too far into society.

<br />

<p>Capitalism, in its crudest form where supply meets demand at any cost, allows for immense revenue to be made off any anomaly in the market, up to and including large entities that capitalize off basic psychological needs, namely social media conglomerates. As they have evolved to the current date, social media platforms are quite large, functioning almost as modern day ‘town squares’, only allowing minor changes in the overall infrastructure due to their perceived function as a fundamental structure in our modern society. The term ‘social media’ defines not a single application but a range of platforms– Facebook, YouTube, Twitter, Reddit, Instagram, etc.</p>

<br />

<p>Each of these platforms have one thing in common– an algorithm. Social media developers, selected specifically for their ability to interpret and manipulate data anomalies, engineer these algorithms, tailoring them explicitly to find related material and content for users to keep them constantly engaged, the greatest example of this being their infamously ingenious implementation of ‘infinite scroll’ or ‘endless scroll’. These algorithms track an individual’s locations, photos, messages, likes, and favorites; a mine’s worth of data is harvested from the individual, fed into the algorithm comprising a neural network, and like a web woven from a spider, the user’s page is sprawled in a string of personalized content fabricated to hunt their attention.</p>

<br />

<p>These platforms have an inevitably consequential effect on the individual and group psychology of its users; as a result, the relationship between social media and the human mind as it forms a persona, a group, a family, and a society does not trend well in markers of stability, causing turmoil on the vast scale spanning from the individual to the civilization. The rate of fake news spreading is six times faster than real news, both a cause and an effect of massive counter-information and propaganda campaigns. Group polarization and virtual echo chambers push two opposing ideas to varying extents on each end, creating a collective of individuals with an ‘in-group bias,’ or a psychological tendency to prefer the members of one’s perceived ‘group’ over the ‘out-group’, almost reminiscent of the archetypal caveman operating on a ‘lizard brain’ expressing his tribal nature; in the isolation of clinical, peer-reviewed study, or rather the impromptu, profit-focused platforms in discussion, however, this cliché can be analyzed– humans evidently tend towards group or clique behavior time and time again, owing to both their advantage against natural threats but also their susceptibility to consumer-facing tactics in the 21st century .Television channels like CNN and Fox News further use this to their advantage, garnering viewership by polarizing their audience directly via their mobile devices. Controversial topics like politics, vaccines, and abortions create such magnified polarizations on two discrete extremes, that all hope of reconciliation and compromise quickly evaporate. </p>

<br />

<p>These subtle features which come together and abstract the semblance of a virtual world form a network of information and data exchange which effectively entrap the average Jane or Joe; with each and every one of their peers being plugged into the algorithm, even the ‘uninitiated’ stands no chance against the horde. Software engineers at Meta, Google, Apple, and their subsidiaries have manufactured a world which, as it is described in <i>The Social Dilemma</i>, poses an attack vector for the stability of the human brain as it comprises not just the individual, but the peer unit, the family unit, and the society as a whole. <i>The Social Dilemma</i> outlines the realities of the tech world as it concerns corporations and their strong armed advantage over the consumer; these Silicon Valley industry giants comprise hundreds of people working under the demand of the shareholder to not just meet but multiply consumer demand at all costs. In the movie, the cast brings up awareness of algorithms, fake news, infinite scroll, and other such addictive methods explicitly engineered on idea boards. Algorithms are meant to receive relative content to what you're watching. It also discusses fake news on how it can affect politics, etc. The infinite scroll is where users repeatedly get continuous content like Instagram and Tiktok. Addictive methods like emojis promote texting and communication. As Tristan Harris mentions in the movie, “If you’re not paying for the product, then you are the product.”</p>

<br />

<p>Corporate entities have allocated entire teams of PhDs and experts with years of experience to research and maximize the responsiveness of the human brain to social media engagement, down to the curve of each page element, the sound of each notification, all in hopes of creating positive intermittent reinforcement, weaving a web more attractive and more entrapping than their competitor. This has had ineffable unintended consequences on the individual and group psychology of human minds, especially developing minds, in the 21st century.</p>

<br />

<p>The first social media networks, MySpace and Facebook, were released in 2003 and 2004 respectively; the rates of suicide and depression, as discussed in <i>The Social Dilemma</i>, notably across younger demographics, analogously have increased since 2010. Pre-teens are almost 3 times more susceptible to such influence. Nowadays, there are social media influencers that promote and influence products or ideas, taking the place of role models for younger generations as they become socialized to the world in a uniquely unordinary way. Influencers like Summer Ray and other Instagram, Twitter, and TikTok celebrities negatively promote such body images. These perceptions cause young girls with body dysmorphia promoting plastic surgery. However, we must question before accusing, are these trends correlated? Only afterwards can we begin inspecting proportions and assigning fault.
The overwhelming legal power of the corporations behind these platforms must first be addressed and dismissed, as their stream of revenue itself is a function of their psychological engineering; the ruling between a crowd of lawyers in a court of law does not constitute what is factually and morally correct. It must be made clear that Meta, Google, Apple, and other entities absolutely are exploiting petabytes upon petabytes of data to leverage the world population to the advantage of their shareholders; however ‘legal’ this might be, it does not excuse it from scientific scrutiny.</p>

<br />

<p>‘Dunbar’s number’ is a phenomenon relevant to the context presented earlier, and helps understand why one may choose to view these ‘fun’, happy-go-lucky apps as an attack vector. This number, formulated by anthropologist and evolutionary psychologist Robin Dunbar, defines “the cognitive limit to the number of people with whom one can maintain stable social relationships,” and is said to be around 150-500, with higher estimates at over 1000 and lower estimates under 100. In layman’s terms, this defines the upper limit on how many people an individual can ever, biologically speaking, hope to ‘know’ beyond just an acquaintance or stranger. It is therefore irrefutable that the ‘town square’, consisting of an upwards of millions of people, projected by the gadgets made plenty only in the past decade have been encroaching upon the psychological limits hardwired into the human brain, and that to deny any correlation between a progressive trend in mental illness and the rapidly cellularized, oversocialized world of today is not simply ignorant, but negligent to the consequences our youth and posterity may face.</p>

<br />

<p>If the human brain in its primitive state has the capacity to recognize 500 people, with even such a large tribe being a rare exception for the majority of mankind’s history, what effect can multiplying this exposure by ten, hundreds, thousands of times? The common mind at this point in the century is in a state of havoc trying to seek out its tribe, its aggressors, parsing through the endless catalog of information with its own biological algorithm. The interactions between the cerebral cortex– the foundation of our consciousness– and the more primitive functions comprising the lower layers of the brain intersect and reach a limit at this point in our technological evolution. At this point, hundreds of years into market cycles, we are little more than numbers in a square matrix fed into a function to predict our next move, cast explicitly as ‘psychometric doppelgangers’ as described in the film, with companies graphing data stolen from each consumer onto a chart, predicting the next possible move– a like, a follow, an intriguing post, or, most lucrative of all, an enticing advertisement.</p>

<br />

<p>On social media, the consumer’s virtual world is plastered with advertisements around content that has already been vetted to keep them engaged. These advertisements use the peripheral route to persuasion, leveraging the collected data to create targeted ads which the consumer may need, recognize, or enjoy.Adolescents are especially easy to get captive of when it comes to attention, being that their brains, specifically their hippocampi and prefrontal cortices, are not yet fully developed. The advertisements thus use easy-to-process cues using an attractive representative or a known celebrity promotion appealing to young minds and incentivizing a purchase. This is the crux of the process for the engineers, the board of directors, and the shareholders who have a stake only in the financial process. The business process runs on and on with only the profit incentive in mind, making no detour for a psychiatric or psychological evaluation. The consumers in this stage are merely cogs in the machine, virtual protagonists wound up and released to create traffic, power the network, and farm data; any deviation from this configuration is rendered impossible, each pawn can only comply in hopes of ‘beating the race’ across the projected checkerboard, ascending rank in the procession of a zero sum game.</p>

<br />

<p>“Compliance means following explicit requests made by other individuals. Conformity means a change in an individual's attitude due to explicit or implicit pressure from other individuals.” Both behaviors are examples of social influence that can be observed in the psychology of consumers, especially in the context of this essay. Users showcase themselves in a more positive way and conform to society’s expectations to fit in, for better or for worse. As discussed before, such behavior is not out of place with human players, but with the addition of artificial intelligence and the rise of fabricated, independently coded ‘bots’, this social media landscape becomes the backdrop for an advertiser-heavy propaganda war. </p>

<br />

<p>This is evident not only by the rapid spread of misinformation campaigns that prey on the consumer’s lack of education, but also the prevalence of many hateful accounts calling for violence and rioting against the establishment which supports this lifestyle. This sort of cognitive dissonance, almost a delusioned, out-of-touch aspect of personality, has become more and more normalized; ideas which in the past used to be termed ‘radical’, such as movements to both militarize and defund the police, use public funds to support foreign conflicts, conspiracies involving the government and the rise of the coronavirus, are becoming more usual and frequent in conversation, in the public mindset, in reactive policy, and in the media.</p>

<br />

<p>The effects that bots have had on influencing much of the propaganda on either side, with social media platforms as the playing field, has caused an unprecedented amount of panic, confusion, and uncertainty; never before in history has one had to question whether their opponent in combat or debate, in an argument or a propaganda war, was actually human or not. This creates another dimension of the dilemma which is far too complex to summarize, but can and will have a resounding effect in the fields of philosophy, psychology, and various sciences in the coming decades. The human relationship with technology is already multifaceted and complex, however the evolution of AI will create a vector that humanity is little prepared for, an algorithm which can plot and curve each novel feature of the human psyche and create a perfect mirror, a bot which can work to undermine the individual with their own tactics, virtually indistinguishable from a con man or a cunning spy, working with all of humanity’s collective knowledge of social engineering with only the creator’s goal in mind. The greatest concern with this is the cold, unfeeling nature of AI, and how it may react to the flaws of the human condition.</p>

<br />

<p>Although <i>The Social Dilemma</i> represents social media spiraling towards a negative end, it will still inevitably be used throughout our lives and beyond. Whether we wish it or not, it will be used in networking, communications, promoting goods, services, and continue to be at the forefront of advertising campaigns. Social media allows us to interact with individuals different from us while also connecting with family and friends irrespective of distance. While this unique advent in the history of humanity has started off with some unintended consequences, to scrap the structure entirely would be a mistake of equal magnitude.It is reasonable to expect such a novel landscape of interaction to begin with a series of hiccups before being adjusted and fine-tuned to the benefit of humanity, however it is important to keep this motivation in mind while working to revolutionize the pillars of the market– the principle of greed must instead be replaced by a profit incentive capitalizing not on the weaknesses of the moral compass, but on the collective will to evolve and expound the health of humankind with the tools at our hands, using them to our advantage rather than the other way around.</p>